The Bible contains
many fundamental principles
that a Christian
can use every day to guide his life.
For example,
at Proverbs 13:20, we’re told
that if we ‘walk with wise persons,
we will become wise.’
Proverbs 28:20 states
that if ‘we’re faithful,
we will receive many blessings.’
Likely you have Bible principles
that you live by as well.
However, as it pertains to pursuing peace,
there is one essential principle
that must be followed.
Let’s find out what it is.
Turn with me, please, to Galatians chapter 6,
and let’s read the words
of Galatians chapter 6,
verses 7, 8.
Here we read:
“Do not be misled:
“God is not one to be mocked.
“For whatever a person is sowing,
“this he will also reap;
“because the one sowing
with a view to his flesh
“will reap corruption from his flesh,
“but the one sowing with a view to the spirit
will reap everlasting life from the spirit.”
So the principle:
We reap what we sow.
You might think of a farmer;
he knows that he must plant
what he hopes to reap.
He also knows that he will not
reap fruitage right away,
but he trusts the results
will come in due time.
It is similar with the quality of peace.
The only way for us to reap peace
is to sow it.
And as we put in the work to achieve it,
we trust that in due time
we will reap the benefits.
In this symposium, we will consider Bible
and modern-day accounts
of how Jehovah’s people,
despite particular challenges,
have reaped peace after first sowing it.
Now, one particular challenge
to gaining peace
is problems within the family.
Because of imperfection,
it’s not uncommon to have disagreements,
even tension, from time to time.
And family members may hurt one another
in various ways.
And usually such offenses are minor,
and peace can quickly be sown and reaped.
But what if the offense is more serious?
A family member says or does something
that hurts us deeply.
Well, even then,
it still may be possible
to sow and reap peace.
We can prove this
by considering the Bible account
of Joseph and his brothers.
Now, we’re familiar with the story.
Out of envy,
Joseph’s brothers sold him into slavery.
And this was by no means a minor offense.
It began with Joseph being led to Egypt.
Sometime later, he was falsely accused
and thrown into prison.
So for 13 years,
Joseph suffered mistreatment
when he had done nothing to deserve it.
Now, it could have been very easy
for Joseph to feel
that if he ever saw his brothers again,
the best option for peace
would be not to have any dealings
with them at all.
Perhaps we might feel the same way as well.
But Joseph didn’t do that.
In fact, after some years passed,
both Joseph and his brothers sowed peace.
Now, note how this was done.
Turn with me, please, to the 105th Psalm,
and note the 19th verse of Psalm 105.
It says: “Until the time
that his word proved true,
“the saying of Jehovah
is what refined him.”
Joseph trusted in Jehovah to refine him,
to shape his thinking and godly qualities.
He refused to become bitter.
In fact, how interesting it is to note
that there is nothing
in the Scriptures to indicate
that Joseph ever told anyone,
not even Pharaoh,
that his brothers were the ones
who kidnapped him and sold him as a slave.
And how about Joseph’s brothers?
Years after they had mistreated him,
they met Joseph in Egypt.
When Joseph tested them
by giving the youngest brother, Benjamin,
significantly more attention
than he gave the others,
he saw that his brothers had changed.
They had let go of envy.
They showed genuine concern for their brother
and for their father, Jacob.
Joseph realized
that his brothers were repentant,
and he forgave them.
And because Joseph and his brothers
were willing to take steps to sow peace,
they reaped the benefits
and eventually were able to enjoy
a harmonious relationship.
Well, how can the example
of Joseph and his brothers
help us today?
In the following dramatization,
notice how a family member sows peace.
And every morning
—and I mean every morning—
there’s Jeremy singing
at the top of his lungs.
OK, I wasn’t the only one.
No, but you were the loudest.
Spoken like a true big brother.
I was always impressed
with how close you two were.
Hmm.
Well, it wasn’t always that way.
No.
I mean, it started out that way.
Nick and I—we weren’t just brothers;
we were friends.
But then the family business
ran into trouble,
and what started
as a small disagreement just exploded.
You don’t even understand at all
how our business works!
Instead of criticizing,
could you just once . . .
Jeremy!
Do you have any idea
what this is going to cost us?
I didn’t have a choice.
You went behind my back!
What’s your problem?
You!
You’re the problem.
We tried to work it out.
But things just got worse.
It was like a door
had slammed shut between us.
On the outside,
I acted like everything was fine.
But inside, I couldn’t let it go.
I felt like a total hypocrite,
and that had to change.
I needed a lot of help from Jehovah
to let go
—to move on—
and make things right with Nick.
It took a long time
for the wounds to heal . . .
. . . and for us to trust each other
the way we used to.
But we did.
I’m so grateful that we made peace
before the world turned upside down.
So how can you and I
imitate Joseph and his brothers?
Let’s discuss three steps.
The first step is found at Ephesians 4:32.
Let’s read that
—Ephesian 4:32:
“But become kind to one another,
“tenderly compassionate,
freely forgiving one another
“just as God also by Christ
freely forgave you.”
So first, we must be ready to forgive.
If we let grievances and resentment build up
and develop in our hearts,
it becomes even more difficult
to be forgiving.
Did you note in the video that what started
as a small disagreement
between Nick and Jeremy exploded
into something much bigger?
Why?
Jeremy could not let go
of his resentment toward his brother.
We must work to treat others
in a forgiving way,
just as Jehovah treats us.
The second step:
Don’t dwell on the offense.
Proverbs 17:9 says:
“The one who keeps harping on a matter
separates close friends.”
And isn’t that how Jeremy described
the relationship with his brother?
It was a door slammed shut between them.
It wasn’t until steps were taken to sow peace
—having that open, honest communication
with each other;
spending time together;
working with each other in the ministry—
only then did things start to improve.
And did you notice?
Everything did not go back
to normal right away.
It took time to reap peace,
time for those wounds to heal,
time to regain lost trust.
So we can’t look for miracles,
but we should look for progress.
Like the farmer, trust that in due time
we will see results from our efforts.
And here’s where
the all-important third step comes in:
Ask Jehovah in prayer
to help us to let go of resentment.
Remember Psalm 105:19.
It was “the saying of Jehovah”
that helped refine Joseph
to develop the qualities needed
not to become bitter
and to let go of any resentment.
In the video, Jeremy acknowledged
that he needed Jehovah’s help
to let go and to move on.
And Jehovah can do the same for us.
It’s not easy when we go through situations
that threaten the peace of our family.
But if we live by this fundamental principle
—we reap what we sow—
then we can be assured
that with a forgiving spirit,
looking for opportunities to sow peace,
and beseeching Jehovah for his help
our efforts will be blessed
and, in due time, we and our family
can reap the benefits
and enjoy true peace.
Brother Ronald Curzan,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“How They Sowed and Reaped Peace
—The Gibeonites.”